>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, OCTOBER 3:
A UNITED STATES AIRSTRIKE
AGAINST THE TALIBAN IN
AFGHANISTAN ACCIDENTALLY HITS A
HOSPITAL, KILLING AND WOUNDING
DOZENS.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
TRANSFORMING HOW AMERICAN
TEACHERS ARE TRAINED.
>> THE OVERARCHING THEME IS THAT
WE ARE ALL LEARNERS, IT'S KEPT
ME HERE BECAUSE IT'S-- IT KEEPS
PUSHING ME TO SAY, "I CAN LEARN
MORE.
I CAN BE BETTER IN MY CRAFT."
>> Sreenivasan: AND, USING
TECHNOLOGY SO AT-RISK STUDENTS
CAN LEARN AT THEIR OWN PACE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> FROM THE AGNES VARIS NJTV
STUDIO IN NEWARK, NEW JERSEY,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
AS AMERICAN MILITARY FORCES
RENEW EFFORTS TO ROLL BACK THE
LATEST TALIBAN OFFENSIVE IN
AFGHANISTAN, A U.S. AIRSTRIKE
APPEARS TO HAVE ACCIDENTALLY
CAUSED SIGNIFICANT CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES.
THE NIGHTTIME AERIAL ATTACK
MISTAKENLY BOMBED A HOSPITAL IN
THE NORTHERN AFGHAN CITY OF
KUNDUZ, WHICH WAS TAKEN OVER BY
THE TALIBAN THIS WEEK.
IMAGES FROM OVERNIGHT SHOWED
FIRES BLAZING INSIDE THE
HOSPITAL.
THE HUMANITARIAN GROUP DOCTORS
WITHOUT BORDERS, WHICH RUNS THE
HOSPITAL, SAYS AT LEAST 19
PEOPLE WERE KILLED, INCLUDING
THREE CHILDREN AND 12 OF ITS
MEDICAL STAFF, WHILE SEVERAL
DOZEN OTHER PATIENTS AND STAFF
WERE WOUNDED.
DOCTORS WITHOUT BORDERS ALSO
SAYS IT TOLD THE U.S. AND AFGHAN
MILITARY IN BOTH WASHINGTON AND
KABUL THAT THE HOSPITAL WAS HIT,
YET THE BOMBING CONTINUED FOR
ANOTHER 30 MINUTES.
>> IT'S A LARGE HOSPITAL, VERY
WELL KNOWN, AND INDEED WE HAVE
COMMUNICATED SEVERAL TIMES WITH
ALL PARTIES TO THE CONFLICT IN
AFGHANISTAN THE PRECISE
LOCATIONS WITH GPS COORDINATES,
AND THIS WE HAVE EVEN REPEATED
OVER THE LAST TWO WEEKS.
>> Sreenivasan: A U.S. MILITARY
OFFICIAL CONFIRMED THE AIRSTRIKE
MAY HAVE RESULTED IN COLLATERAL
DAMAGE TO A NEARBY MEDICAL
FACILITY.
AFGHAN PRESIDENT ASHRAF GHANI
SAYS HE HAS RECEIVED CONDOLENCES
FROM THE COMMANDER OF U.S.
FORCES IN AFGHANISTAN, AND U.S.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH CARTER
SAYS HE HAS LAUNCHED A FULL
INVESTIGATION INTO WHAT HE CALLS
A TRAGIC INCIDENT.
THE SEIZURE OF KUNDUZ,
AFGHANISTAN'S SIXTH LARGEST
CITY, WAS THE TALIBAN'S BIGGEST
TACTICAL VICTORY SINCE 2001.
AND FIGHTING WITH GOVERNMENT
TROOPS HAS ESCALATED THERE ALL
WEEK.
10,000 AMERICAN SOLDIERS REMAIN
IN THE COUNTRY TO ASSIST THE
AFGHAN ARMY.
JOINING US NOW VIA SKYPE FROM
TOKYO, JAPAN, IS JASON CONE.
HE IS THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF
MSF-USA, OR DOCTORS WITHOUT
BORDERS.
THIS IS A TERRIBLE DAY FOR YOUR
ORGANIZATION.
YOU'VE LIKELY BEEN IN CONTACT
WITH SOME OF THOSE PEOPLE THAT
WERE AFFECTED IN KUNDUZ.
WHAT DO THEY DESCRIBE IS
HAPPENING?
>> YES, IT'S DEFINITELY ONE OF
THE DARKEST DAYS IN OUR
ORGANIZATION'S HISTORY.
AND WE'VE BEEN IN TOUCH WITH THE
TEAMS ON THE GROUND, AND WE ARE
EVACUATING OUR INTERNATIONAL
STAFF FROM KUNDUZ, AND WHAT THEY
TELL US IS THE BOMBS HIT AROUND
2:00 A.M. THIS MORNING
AFGHANISTAN TIME IN KUNDUZ.
AND THEN THEY HEARD PLANES
CIRCLING AROUND.
THERE WAS A PAUSE AND THEN THERE
WERE MORE BOMBS HIT.
AND THAT HAPPENED AGAIN AND
AGAIN.
AND WHEN OUR STAFF WENT OUT OF
THEIR OFFICE, THE MAIN HOSPITAL
BUILDING WAS ENGULFED IN FLAMES,
AND WE HAD PATIENTS WHO WERE
UNABLE TO ESCAPE WHO DIED IN
THEIR BEDS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
ANYWHERE ANY OF THE WOUNDED NOW
CAN GO IF THAT HOSPITAL IS
INCAPACITATED?
>> NO, YOU'RE SEEING A LOSS OF
ACCESS TO TRAUMA CARE.
IT WAS THE ONLY FACILITY IN THIS
AREA, IN THE NORTHEASTERN REGION
OF AFGHANISTAN.
WE'VE BEEN TREATING HUNDREDS OF
WOUNDED OVER THE PAST FEW DAYS
DURING THE FIGHTING IN KUNDUZ.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT HAVE YOU
DONE AFTERWARDS FOR YOUR STAFF
IN THAT AREA?
>> WE HAVE EVACUATED OUR
INTERNATIONAL STAFF TO KABUL AND
TRANSPORTED THE WOUNDED TO
ANOTHER HOSPITAL ABOUT TWO HOURS
AWAY, AND WE'RE TRYING TO RIGHT
NOW PROVIDE AS MUCH SUPPORT TO
THEM AS POSSIBLE IN KUNDUZ.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT SORTS OF
EFFORTS OR MEASURES DID YOU GO
TO, TO MAKE SURE THAT ALL THE
FIGHTING PARTIES KNEW THAT YOU
WERE A SAFE ZONE?
>> WELL, WE MAKE DIRECT CONTACT
AT THE FIELD LEVEL WITH VARIOUS
ARMED GROUPS.
AND I CAN TELL YOU THAT ON
SEPTEMBER 29, AND THE WEEKS
PRIOR, WE HAD MADE SURE THAT AT
THE HIGHEST LEVEL OF BOTH THE
MILITARY AND CIVILIAN CHAIN OF
COMMAND IN THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
THEY HAD THE G.P.S. COORDINATES
OF OUR COMPOUND.
AND AT THE OUTSET OF THE ATTACK
WE ALSO MADE CONTACT WITH
VARIOUS CONTACTS AT THE JOINT
CHAIRMAN'S OFFICE TO REITERATE
THE ATTACK WAS UNFOLDING.
AND WE CONVEYED THAT INFORMATION
IN REAL TIME, AND WE SAW NOTHING
CHANGE.
AND YOU SEE NOW THAT WE HAVE 19
DEAD.
>> Sreenivasan: JUST TO
CLARIFY-- ONCE THE HOSPITAL WAS
UNDER ATTACK, YOUR AGENCY MADE
CONTACT WITH THE U.S. MILITARY,
THE AFGHAN FORCES TO TELL THEM,
AND THE BOMBS STILL KEPT
FALLING?
>> THAT IS CORRECT.
WE INFORMED OUR CONTACTS, BOTH
IN WASHINGTON AND KABUL LEVEL,
AND THE ATTACKS CONTINUED TO
HAPPEN, IN SPITE OF OUR EFFORTS,
BOTH IN THE DAYS PRIOR AND WHEN
THE ATTACK WAS UNFOLDING.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN YOU MEET
WITH PENTAGON OFFICIALS OR OTHER
PEOPLE OVER THE NEXT FEW DAYS,
WHAT ARE YOU LOOKING FOR?
>> WE WANT AN EXPLANATION, AND
WE WANT AN INDEPENDENT
INVESTIGATION.
WE WANT TO UNDERSTAND WHAT
HAPPENED.
THERE'S HONESTLY NO
JUSTIFICATION.
IT WAS CLEAR THAT THIS WAS A
FULLY FUNCTIONING HOSPITAL, AND
WE NEED ANSWERS, AND WE NEED
THOSE ANSWERS NOT JUST FROM THE
U.S. MILITARY BUT WE NEED SOME
KIND OF INDEPENDENT
INVESTIGATION THAT'S CREDIBLE.
AND WE DON'T WANT TO JUST HEAR
THAT THIS WAS SOME KIND OF
MISTAKE AND THAT THERE'S JUST
COLLATERAL DAMAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALSO, THERE
WERE SOME REPORTS THAT PERHAPS
THE TALIBAN HAD INFILTRATED THE
COMPOUND AND WERE ACTUALLY
FIRING FROM THERE.
IN THE LAST FEW DAYS, DID ANY
MEMBER OF YOUR ORGANIZATION
WITNESS THAT OR WERE YOU UNDER
THREAT IN THAT WAY?
>> WE WERE NOT UNDER THREAT IN
ANY WAY.
AND I CAN TELL YOU THAT AS FAR
AS OUR STAFF NOW, THE GATES OF
THE HOSPITAL COMPOUND WERE
CLOSED ALL NIGHT SO THAT NO
ONE-- THERE IS NOT STAFF, A
PATIENT OR CARETAKER WAS INSIDE
THE HOSPITAL WHEN THE BOMBING
HAPPENED.
IT'S ALSO IMPORTANT TO KEEP IN
MIND, ACCORDING TO MILITARY LAW,
ANY INJURED PERSON IN THE
HOSPITAL IS CONSIDERED A
NONCOMBATANT.
WHATEVER SIDE THEY MAY HAVE
FOUGHT FOR BEFORE.
IN ANY CASE, BOMBING A FULLY
FUNCTIONING HOSPITAL CAN NEVER
BE JUSTIFIED.
>> Sreenivasan: JASON CONE,
THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF MTV
U.S.A., THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR
YOUR TIME AND I'M SORRY FOR YOUR
LOSS.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: A MEDICAL
EXAMINER HAS DETERMINED THE
CAUSE OF DEATH OF THE GUNMAN WHO
CARRIED OUT THURSDAY'S MASS
SHOOTING AT UMPQUA COMMUNITY
COLLEGE IN RURAL ROSEBURG,
OREGON.
CHRISTOPHER HARPER-MERCER DIED
OF A SELF-INFLICTED GUNSHOT
WOUND, POLICE SAID TODAY.
THEY ALSO SAID THE GUNMAN OWNED
OR POSSESSED 14 GUNS.
HE BROUGHT SIX OF THEM TO CAMPUS
AND USED A HANDGUN IN HIS
RAMPAGE.
WE NOW KNOW THE NINE PEOPLE HE
KILLED RANGED IN AGE FROM 18 TO
67.
THEY INCLUDED FIVE STUDENTS
UNDER 21 YEARS OLD, THREE OLDER
STUDENTS, AND THE INSTRUCTOR OF
THE WRITING CLASS THAT WAS
ATTACKED.
RUSSIA IS VOWING TO INCREASE THE
INTENSITY OF AIRSTRIKES IN SYRIA
TO PROP UP THE REGIME OF
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
RUSSIAN WARPLANES STRUCK MORE
TARGETS ACROSS NORTHERN AND
CENTRAL SYRIA TODAY, A TOTAL OF
MORE THAN 60 AIR STRIKES IN THE
PAST FOUR DAYS.
RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT VIDEO SHOWED
WARPLANES STRIKING WHAT RUSSIA
DESCRIBED AS COMMAND CENTERS AND
MUNITIONS DEPOTS BELONGING TO
MILITANTS FROM THE ISLAMIC
STATE, OR ISIS.
BUT THE U.S. AND ITS ALLIES SAY
THE RUSSIAN AIR STRIKES ARE ALSO
HITTING FREE SYRIAN ARMY REBELS
BACKED BY THE U.S. WHO OPPOSE
THE ASSAD REGIME IN THE FOUR-
YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
THE COALITION IS CALLING ON
RUSSIA TO CEASE ITS ATTACKS.
NORMAL TRAIN SERVICE HAS RESUMED
IN THE TUNNEL THAT CONNECTS THE
EUROPEAN CONTINENT TO ENGLAND.
OVERNIGHT AND THIS MORNING,
SEVERAL HUNDRED MIGRANTS SNEAKED
THROUGH THE FRENCH ENTRANCE TO
THE EUROTUNNEL ON FOOT OR BY
JUMPING ON TRUCKS, CAUSING THE
TUNNEL TO BE CLOSED TEMPORARILY.
SOME MIGRANTS GOT AS FAR AS NINE
MILES INTO THE TUNNEL BEFORE
BEING STOPPED BY POLICE.
TWO DOZEN WERE ARRESTED.
THE U.K. HAS PLEDGED TO ACCEPT
20,000 REFUGEES FROM SYRIA OVER
THE NEXT FIVE YEARS.
GERMANY'S PRESIDENT SAYS THE
MIGRANT CRISIS IS A CHALLENGE
THAT MAY OCCUPY THE COUNTRY FOR
GENERATIONS.
JOACHIM GAUCK, THE COUNTRY'S
LARGELY CEREMONIAL PRESIDENT
SINCE 2012, MADE THE COMMENT AT
CEREMONIES MARKING TODAY'S 25th
ANNIVERSARY OF THE UNIFICATION
OF EAST AND WEST GERMANY.
GERMAN CHANCELLOR ANGELA MERKEL
SAID TODAY MIGRANTS COMING ONLY
FOR ECONOMIC REASONS WOULD NOT
BE ALLOWED TO STAY.
GERMANY EXPECTS TO ABSORB AS
MANY AS 800,000 ASYLUM SEEKERS
WHO HAVE ARRIVED IN EUROPE THIS
YEAR PRIMARILY FROM SYRIA, IRAQ,
LIBYA AND AFGHANISTAN.
HURRICANE JOAQUIN IS WELL OFF
THE U.S. MAINLAND, BUT HEAVY
RAIN COMBINED WITH THE STORM
SURGE IS CAUSING SEVERE FLOODING
IN THE MID-ATLANTIC REGION.
THE WORST FLOODING IS OCCURRING
IN THE CAROLINAS, WHERE SEVERAL
FEET OF WATER HAS CAUSED SOME
ROADS TO BE SHUT DOWN AND
COMMUNITIES EVACUATED.
EXTREME FLOOD THREATS REMAIN IN
EFFECT NEAR CHARLESTON AND
MYRTLE BEACH, THE OUTER BANKS OF
NORTH CAROLINA AND VIRGINIA
BEACH.
AN AMERICAN CARGO CONTAINER SHIP
CAUGHT IN JOAQUIN IS STILL
MISSING.
THE SHIP "EL FARO" AND ITS 33
CREW MEMBERS, LEFT JACKSONVILLE,
FLORIDA, FOR PUERTO RICO ON
TUESDAY AND HAS NOT BEEN HEARD
FROM SINCE ISSUING A DISTRESS
CALL THURSDAY MORNING.
THE U.S. COAST GUARD IS LEADING
THE SEARCH, NOW NEAR THE
BAHAMAS.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MANY PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATIONS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, TODAY IS AMERICAN
GRADUATE DAY, A MULTI-PLATFORM
EVENT ON-AIR AND ONLINE, FOCUSED
ON KEEPING KIDS ON A PATH TO
GRADUATION, FEATURING
CONVERSATIONS AND REPORTS ON
EARLY EDUCATION, DROPOUT
PREVENTION AND COLLEGE
COMPLETION.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
TONIGHT, WE LOOK AT HOW TEACHERS
ARE BEING TRAINED FOR CAREERS IN
THE CLASSROOM.
HALF OF AMERICAN TEACHERS
ACTUALLY QUIT THE PROFESSION
AFTER ONLY A FEW YEARS ON THE
JOB.
BUT AN INNOVATIVE PROGRAM IN
BOSTON HELPS SCHOOLS RETAIN
TEACHERS LONGER WHILE
RECRUITING MORE SCIENCE AND MATH
TEACHERS AND MORE TEACHERS OF
COLOR.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE SECOND
WEEK ON THE JOB FOR 22-YEAR-OLD
RENEE ALVES.
>> WHEN YOU SAY YOU COUNTED BY
ONES, WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY THAT?
>> Reporter: SHE'S ASSIGNED TO
THIS THIRD GRADE CLASS AT THE
DUDLEY STREET NEIGHBORHOOD
CHARTER SCHOOL IN THE ROXBURY
SECTION OF BOSTON, BUT SHE IS
NOT A TEACHER YET.
SHE IS PART OF A TRAINING
PROGRAM CALLED THE BOSTON
TEACHER RESIDENCY.
>> COUNT BY MULTIPLES OF TEN.
>> Reporter: AS ONE OF 40
RESIDENTS IN THE TEACHER
TRAINING PROGRAM THIS YEAR,
RENEE WILL SPEND TEN MONTHS
WATCHING, EMULATING AND
LEARNING AS MUCH AS SHE CAN FROM
EXPERIENCED TEACHER KAYLA MORSE.
>> AND WHAT MULTIPLICATION
EQUATION CAN I WRITE TO
REPRESENT THAT?
>> YOU CAN LEARN FROM A
TEXTBOOK, BUT I THINK IT'S A LOT
DIFFERENT WHEN YOU'RE IN A
CLASSROOM AND YOU'RE SEEING IT
IN PERSON.
>> Reporter: RENEE'S LENGTHY
TRAINING PERIOD IS PART OF A
TRANSFORMATION IN THE WAY BOSTON
AND A HANDFUL OF OTHER CITIES
PREPARE THEIR TEACHERS.
WHILE SOME TEACHER TRAINING
PROGRAMS REQUIRE ONLY A FEW
WEEKS IN THE CLASSROOM, THESE
RESIDENCY MODELS REQUIRE FAR
MORE.
IN 2003, JESSE SOLOMON, WHO
TAUGHT MATH IN BOSTON PUBLIC
SCHOOLS FOR TEN YEARS, CO-
FOUNDED THE PROGRAM THAT HE
LIKENS TO A MEDICAL RESIDENCY.
>> ONE THING I SAW A LOT WHEN I
WAS TEACHING WAS A NUMBER OF
BRAND NEW TEACHERS COMING INTO
THE PROFESSION.
SMART, COMMITTED, HARD-WORKING,
KIND OF WILLING TO DO WHATEVER
IT TAKES, BUT NOT REALLY KNOWING
HOW TO TEACH THAT FIRST YEAR.
MY CONCERN WAS ALWAYS THAT THEY
WERE LEARNING ON THE BACKS ON
THE KIDS THAT HAD THEM THAT
YEAR, RIGHT?
SO IF YOU'RE A FIRST-YEAR
TEACHER IN ALGEBRA 1 CLASS, YOU
GET ANOTHER SHOT NEXT YEAR.
FOR THOSE KIDS TAKING ALGEBRA 1,
THAT WAS THEIR SHOT AT ALGEBRA
1.
SO HAD IN MY HEAD THAT THERE'S
GOT TO BE A BETTER WAY TO DO
THIS.
>> Reporter: SOLOMON'S GOALS
WERE TO COUNTERACT BOSTON'S
HEAVY TEACHER TURNOVER RATE,
FILL KEY SHORTAGES OF MATH AND
SCIENCE SPECIALISTS, AND
INCREASE THE NUMBER OF MINORITY
TEACHERS.
>> OUR COUNTRY RIGHT NOW INVESTS
IN THE PREPARATION OF DOCTORS TO
THE TUNE OF ABOUT HALF A MILLION
DOLLARS PER DOCTOR.
SO WE'VE OBVIOUSLY DECIDED THAT
TO INVEST IN THE TRAINING OF
THOSE DOCTORS.
SO I'M NOT ARGUING WE SHOULD
SPEND HALF A MILLION DOLLARS PER
TEACHER.
BUT IF EDUCATION IS REALLY AS
IMPORTANT AS EVERYBODY SAYS IT
IS, AND IF TEACHERS ARE REALLY
AS IMPORTANT AS EVERYONE SAYS
THEY ARE, THEN WE SHOULD BE
THINKING ABOUT HOW WE AS A
COUNTRY INVEST IN THE
RECRUITMENT, PREPARATION SUPPORT
OF TEACHERS.
>> Reporter: RENEE SPENDS MONDAY
THROUGH THURSDAYS AS KAYLA'S
APPRENTICE, AND FRIDAYS IN
GRADUATE COURSES.
>> ONE WAY TO DO IT IS COUNT BY
TEN.
>> Reporter: SHE AND HER FELLOW
TRAINEES WILL FINISH THE
RESIDENCY WITH A MASTER'S DEGREE
IN EDUCATION AND BECOME PART OF
THE GROWING ROSTER OF
CLINICALLY-TRAINED TEACHERS IN
THE BOSTON PUBLIC SCHOOL SYSTEM.
THREE OUT OF FOUR OF THESE
GRADUATES FROM THE PAST 12 YEARS
ARE STILL TEACHING IN BOSTON, A
CITY WHERE ONE OUT OF TWO HAVE
LEFT THE PROFESSION.
KAYLA MORSE FINISHED THE PROGRAM
FOUR YEARS AGO.
>> I'VE BEEN TEACHING AT THIS
SCHOOL FOR GOING ON TWO YEARS.
AND WHAT'S KEPT ME HERE IS HOW
THIS SCHOOL IS SET UP.
IT'S A COMMUNITY OF LEARNERS.
SO I FEEL VERY CONNECTED TO THE
VISION OF NOT ONLY PREPARING
STUDENTS FOR THE WORLD BUT ALSO
PREPARING MORE TEACHERS.
>> Reporter: WHEN YOU'RE
THINKING ABOUT HOW YOU'LL WORK
WITH RENEE, ARE YOU MIRRORING A
LOT OF YOUR OWN EXPERIENCES AS A
RESIDENT?
>> SO A LOT OF TIMES I DO MIRROR
MY EXPERIENCES WITH HER, BUT I
ALSO THINK ABOUT IF I WAS NEW TO
THIS PROFESSION OR THIS PLACE,
WHAT ARE SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
I WOULD NEED TO KNOW TO WORK
BETTER.
>> Reporter: DO YOU FEEL A
RESPONSIBILITY TO KIND OF KEEP
HER FIRE BURNING?
>> YES, YES, BECAUSE I THINK
THIS WORK IS CHALLENGING, AND IT
CAN REALLY GET TO YOU, BUT I
FEEL LIKE WHAT KEEPS ME GOING IS
THAT FIRE, AND SOME OF THE SAME
THINGS WE TALK ABOUT WITH OUR
KIDS, INDEPENDENCE,
PERSEVERANCE, PROBLEM-SOLVING,
THOSE ARE THINGS THAT I KIND OF
I CARRY THROUGH IN MY WORKING
RELATIONSHIP WITH HER.
>> Reporter: ROXBURY HAS COME A
LONG WAY IN THE LAST TWO
DECADES.
THESE HOMES HAVE REPLACED EMPTY
LOTS WHERE CITY BUSINESSES USED
TO DUMP THEIR TRASH IN THE
MIDDLE OF THE NIGHT, BUT
RESIDENTS STILL STRUGGLE WITH
HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT, ALMOST HALF
OF THE CHILDREN IN THE AREA LIVE
IN POVERTY, AND THE PROGRAM
RECOGNIZES THIS.
ALONGSIDE COMPREHENSIVE TEACHER
EDUCATION, THE RESIDENTS WORK
WITH LOCAL COMMUNITY GROUPS.
NOT ONLY LEARNING SOME OF THE
HISTORY OF THE BOSTON PUBLIC
SCHOOL SYSTEM, BUT ABOUT THE
PARTICULAR NUANCES OF THE
NEIGHBORHOODS IN WHICH THEY
TEACH.
HERE AT THE DUDLEY STREET SCHOOL
THIS APPROACH HAS LED TO A
STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP WITH THE
DUDLEY STREET NEIGHBORHOOD
INITIATIVE, ONE OF ROXBURY'S
OLDEST AND MOST INFLUENTIAL
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS.
PROGRAM DIRECTOR SHEENA COLLIER
SAYS EVEN WITH 13 SCHOOLS IN
ROXBURY, MORE THAN TWO-THIRDS
ARE BUSED TO SCHOOLS OUTSIDE OF
THE DISTRICT.
>> WE BELIEVE IN PARENTS
CHOOSING TO SEND THEIR CHILD TO
SCHOOL WHEREVER THEY LIKE, BUT
WE'D LIKE THEM TO HAVE THE
OPTION TO SEND THEM TO A QUALITY
SCHOOL IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOOD IF
THAT'S WHAT THE CHOOSE.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS THE DUDLEY
SCHOOL IS AN INTEGRAL PART OF
KEEPING KIDS CLOSE TO HOME.
>> UNLIKE THE OTHER SCHOOLS IN
OUR NEIGHBORHOOD, WE WERE ABLE
TO BE A PART OF THE VISIONING OF
WHAT THIS SCHOOL WOULD LOOK
LIKE, WHAT WOULD IT MEAN FOR OUR
COMMUNITY, WHAT WOULD IT MEAN
FOR THE STUDENTS THAT ATTEND.
>> Reporter: IN ADDITION TO THE
FORWARD MOMENTUM, TEACHERS LIKE
SABINE FERDINAND, A GRADUATE OF
THE RESIDENCY PROGRAM, SAY IT IS
IMPORTANT TO RECOGNIZE THE
CHALLENGING HOME ENVIRONMENT
SOME OF THEIR STUDENTS MAY COME
FROM.
>> I HAVE TO BE REALLY MINDFUL
OF EVERYTHING THAT MY STUDENTS
COME INTO THE CLASSROOM WITH.
YOU KNOW, STUDENTS WHO COME FROM
A DIFFICULT HOME LIFE.
>> Reporter: HOW FAMILIAR WERE
YOU WITH ROXBURY BEFOREHAND?
>> NOT TOO FAMILIAR,
SURPRISINGLY.
I GREW UP MAYBE 25, 30 MINUTES
AWAY FROM HERE BUT BEFORE, YOU
KNOW, STARTING TO TEACH HERE,
THE RESIDENCY TOOK US THROUGHOUT
THE NEIGHBORHOODS AND REALLY
TAUGHT US ABOUT WHERE WE'RE
GOING TO BE WORKING.
AND SO THAT REALLY ALLOWED ME TO
UNDERSTAND ROXBURY.
>> TALK ABOUT WHERE THE ANSWER
WAS TO 60 MINUS 30 IN THIS
REPRESENTATION.
>> Reporter: 12 YEARS IN, THIS
PROGRAM HAS SHOWN SUCCESS NOT
ONLY RETAINING MORE TEACHERS BUT
HIRING MORE SCIENCE AND MATH
SPECIALISTS, AND PLACING MORE
BLACK, LATINO, AND ASIAN-
AMERICANS IN THE CLASSROOM.
IT HASN'T ALL GONE ACCORDING TO
PLAN.
A 2011 HARVARD STUDY FOUND THAT
STANDARDIZED MATH TEST SCORES
WERE LOWER AMONG STUDENTS TAUGHT
BY FIRST YEAR RESIDENTS THAN THE
FIRST YEAR TEACHERS COMING FROM
TRADITIONAL PROGRAMS.
THIS TREND CONTINUES UNTIL THE
FOURTH YEAR OF TEACHING WHEN
SCORES IN RESIDENT CLASSROOMS
SURPASS THEIR COUNTERPARTS.
>> IT WAS A PIVOT POINT.
I'D BE LYING IF I DIDN'T SAY
THERE HAVEN'T BEEN LOTS OF PIVOT
POINTS.
YOU KNOW, IT'S SORT OF LIKE
YOU GO INSTITUTE A BUNCH OF
THINGS, YOU GET SOME SUCCESS.
BUT ALL THAT REALLY DOES IS
TEACH YOU ABOUT THE NEXT
CHALLENGE THAT YOU NEED TO TAKE
ON.
>> Reporter: IN RESPONSE TO THE
STUDY, THE PROGRAM RETOOLED
CONCENTRATING A GREATER NUMBER
OF RESIDENTS IN FEWER SCHOOLS.
>> SO IF YOU HAVE, YOU KNOW,
SEVEN MATH RESIDENTS AND SEVEN
MATH MENTORS AND A MATH CLINIC
TEACHER EDUCATOR, YOU HAVE 15
PEOPLE ALL IN THE SAME SCHOOL
TALKING TOGETHER ON A DAILY
BASIS ABOUT WHAT, LIKE, DOES
GOOD MATH TEACHING LOOK LIKE--
FOR-- FOR THE KIDS IN THIS
SCHOOL.
BUT I THINK THE BIG QUESTION
THAT WE'RE WRESTLING WITH NOW IS
ULTIMATELY ARE OUR TEACHERS GOOD
FOR THE KIDS THEY SERVE IN THE
YEARS DOWN THE LINE?
>> Reporter: ONLY A FEW WEEKS
IN, RENEE HAS A LONG YEAR IN
FRONT OF HER, BUT SAYS SHE IS
UNDETERRED, DRIVEN BY HER TIME
WITH THE STUDENTS.
>> WHEN YOU HAVE THOSE AHA
MOMENTS, OR YOU SEE A CHILD HAVE
THAT AHA MOMENT, AND THEIR FACE
LIGHTS UP, IT MAKES EVERYTHING
WORTH IT.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE MORE FROM
AMERICAN GRADUATE DAY 2015,
INCLUDING STORIES FROM PBS
NEWSHOUR'S STUDENT REPORTING
LABS.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
americangraduate.org AND
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: AS TECHNOLOGY
PLAYS A LARGER ROLE IN THE
CLASSROOM, HOW WILL CLASSROOM
DYNAMICS BE AFFECTED?
AN ALTERNATIVE HIGH SCHOOL IN
THE BRONX, IN NEW YORK CITY,
OFFERS A NEW WAY FOR TEACHERS,
STUDENTS, AND TECHNOLOGY TO
COEXIST IN AN INCREASINGLY
POPULAR MODEL CALLED "BLENDED
LEARNING."
>> Reporter: BRONX ARENA HIGH
SCHOOL IS ONE OF NEARLY 300
SCHOOLS UNDER A NEW YORK CITY
PROGRAM CALLED INNOVATION ZONE,
OR I-ZONE.
STARTED IN 2010, I-ZONE SCHOOLS
USE ONLINE COURSES AND
TECHNOLOGY TO SUPPORT
PERSONALIZED LEARNING IN THE
CLASSROOM.
THE CURRICULUM IS COMPUTERIZED
AND CUSTOMIZED FOR EACH STUDENT.
EVELYN REVOLLAR HAS BEEN
TEACHING HERE FOR FIVE YEARS.
>> IT'S MORE TARGETED TEACHING
THAN A TRADITIONAL CLASSROOM.
WE'RE GROUPING THEM BASED ON
WHAT DO YOU NEED TO GRADUATE?
WHAT HOLES CAN I FILL?
WHAT ACADEMIC HOLES CAN I FILL
THAT HAVEN'T BEEN FILLED YET?
THE COMPUTER'S JUST A TOOL.
>> Reporter: IN THE PAST,
REVOLLAR WOULD HAVE TAUGHT THE
ENTIRE CLASS AT ONCE, MOVING
FROM ONE CONCEPT TO THE NEXT.
INSTEAD, STUDENTS HERE, EQUIPPED
WITH LAPTOPS, WORK MORE
INDEPENDENTLY AND AT THEIR OWN
PACE.
>> THE TEACHERS WORK ONE-ON-ONE
WITH YOU.
SO IT'S NOT LIKE I'M IN A BIG
CLASSROOM AND WITH A BUNCH OF
KIDS, AND I DON'T UNDERSTAND
SOMETHING.
>> Reporter: AN ONLINE TRACKER
HELPS STUDENTS RECORD THEIR
PROGRESS THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
NOW, REVOLLAR CAN INTERCEPT
PROBLEMS AS THEY HAPPEN FOR EACH
STUDENT, BASED ON REAL TIME
FEEDBACK SHE GETS.
>> THE TRACKER IS JUST FOR US
AND THE TEACHERS TO KEEP TRACK
OF OUR COURSES.
IT TELLS ME HOW MANY TASKS
THAT'S IN THAT COURSE AND HOW
MANY TASKS I'M SUPPOSED TO BE
DOING THAT DAY.
>> Reporter: THE TECHNOLOGY
HELPS STUDENTS WHO DID NOT
FINISH TRADITIONAL HIGH SCHOOL.
LESLIANNA ALLEN QUIT SCHOOL IN
TENTH GRADE AND NEEDED EXTRA
HELP IN GLOBAL STUDIES AND MATH.
AT 18, SHE IS GETTING A SECOND
CHANCE AT BRONX ARENA.
>> I HATED MATH.
I HATED GLOBAL AND SINCE I CAME
HERE, I FINISHED MY WHOLE MATH
COURSE, BECAUSE I WENT AT MY
PACE AND HAD TEACHERS TO HELP ME
TOO.
>> Reporter: JOSEPH MCFADDEN WAS
EXPELLED FROM HIS PREVIOUS
SCHOOL.
THIS IS HIS THIRD YEAR AT BRONX
ARENA, AND HE IS ON TRACK TO
GRADUATE IN JANUARY.
HE ALSO CREDITS HIS SUCCESS TO
SOMETHING A COMPUTER CANNOT DO.
>> IT'S A DIFFERENT EXPERIENCE.
LIKE THE TEACHERS, THEY PLAY THE
ROLE OF A TEACHER BUT THEY'RE
MORE OF-- THEY'RE COUNSELORS.
THEY'RE ADVISORS.
THEY WATCH OVER YOU.
THEY HELP YOU WITH YOUR LESSONS.
YOU'RE ABLE TO GET IT FASTER.
>> THEY DON'T ALLOW YOU TO FAIL
HERE, I GOT ACCEPTED, AND MY
GRADES WENT WAY UP.
>> SHE SAID AT THE END OF THE
DAY, "I CAN'T FORCE YOU TO DO
ANYTHING.
I JUST WANT YOU TO LOOK BACK AT
YOURSELF AND ASK YOURSELF, WHERE
DO YOU REALLY WANT TO BE?
DO YOU REALLY THINK SCHOOL IS
FOR YOU?
DO YOU REALLY WANT TO BE
SOMETHING?"
IF YOU DO, THEN TAKE YOUR OWN
ACTIONS INTO YOUR HAND AND DO
SOMETHING WITH YOURSELF.
>> Reporter: ALL THAT INDIVIDUAL
MOTIVATION PER STUDENT TAKES
TIME, AND PRINCIPAL TY CESENE,
WHO FOUNDED BRONX ARENA IN 2011,
SAYS THE TECHNOLOGY ENABLES
THAT.
>> WE WANTED TO USE TECHNOLOGY
TO MAXIMIZE THAT TIME AND REALLY
RELY ON THE HUMAN PART TO DO THE
HUMAN WORK, AND TRY AND TAKE OFF
SOME OF THE SORT OF
ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES
THAT WE HAVE, THAT A COMPUTER
COULD DO.
>> Reporter: AS A RESULT,
TEACHERS SPEND MORE TIME GIVING
STUDENTS INDIVIDUAL ATTENTION
AND MEETING WITH SMALL GROUPS
FOR FOCUSED LESSONS.
TECHNOLOGY IN AND OF ITSELF IS
NOT A PANACEA FOR EVERY
CLASSROOM, BUT THIS BRONX SCHOOL
SO FAR IS HAVING POSITIVE
OUTCOMES.
>> IN TERMS OF THE KIDS WHO
LEAVE US, 80% GO TO COLLEGE, AND
OVER AN 80% COLLEGE RETENTION
RATE, FOR THE BRONX, FOR THE
WHOLE CITY, AND WE'RE PROUD OF
THAT.
>> Reporter: LESLIANNA ALLEN
HOPES TO BE PART OF THAT
SUCCESS.
>> MY PLANS AFTER GRADUATION IS
TO POTENTIALLY WORK WITH KIDS.
I WANT GO TO COLLEGE FOR EARLY
CHILDHOOD.
IT MAKES ME FEEL GOOD BECAUSE
I'M A STEP CLOSER TO GRADUATION.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WILDFIRES HAVE
SCORCHED NINE MILLION ACRES THIS
SUMMER IN THE UNITED STATES,
FROM CALIFORNIA TO ALASKA, AND
IT'S BEEN A BRUTAL FIRE SEASON
IN RUSSIA, TOO.
PARTICULARLY HARD HIT WERE THE
FORESTS AROUND THE WORLD'S
LARGEST AND DEEPEST FRESHWATER
LAKE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE
REPORTS.
>> Reporter: ON THE SHORES OF
LAKE BAIKAL, IN RUSSIAN SIBERIA,
UNUSUALLY WARM TEMPERATURES AND
DRY CONDITIONS MADE FOR
DANGEROUS WILDFIRE CONDITIONS
THIS SUMMER.
AT LEAST 1,500 SQUARE MILES OF
FOREST BURNED UNTIL THE FLAMES
DIED DOWN IN THE PAST FEW WEEKS,
LEAVING SCORCHED EARTH AND TREE
STUMPS WHERE A ONCE-LUSH FOREST
STOOD.
ECOLOGISTS SAY THE FIRES HERE
COULD HAVE A LONG-LASTING IMPACT
ON THE DELICATE ECOSYSTEM AROUND
THE LAKE, WHICH IS HOME TO AN
ESTIMATED 20% OF THE WORLD'S
FRESH, UNFROZEN WATER.
>> (translated): SINCE THE
FORESTS ARE BEING DESTROYED,
GROUNDWATER GETS LOST.
DROUGHT STARTS, THE SPRINGS THAT
ARE STILL FLOWING DRY OUT.
IT LOWERS THE LEVEL OF BAIKAL,
WHICH WAS ALREADY LOWER THAN
CRITICAL.
>> Reporter: THE LAKE IS ONE OF
THE MOST BIO-DIVERSE REGIONS IN
THE WORLD, HOME TO 570 TYPES OF
PLANTS AND MORE THAN 1,300
ANIMAL SPECIES SOME OF WHICH ARE
ENDANGERED.
VOLUNTEERS ARE NOW TRYING TO
PLANT ONE MILLION NEW TREES TO
RESTORE THE LANDSCAPE.
>> (translated): ANY CITIZEN,
ANY RESIDENT CAN COME TO THE
NURSERY, COLLECT A SAPLING AND
PLANT IT IN A PLOT OF GROUND.
ANYONE CAN JOIN THIS ACTION
WHICH ALLOWS YOU TO EXPRESS YOUR
CONCERN ABOUT THE COMMON
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: EVEN A MILLION NEW
TREES WON'T REPLACE ALL THE
GREENERY LOST, AN AREA LARGER
THAN THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND.
BUT VOLUNTEERS SAY, IT'S A
START.
>> (translated): IT'S JUST
THAT WE'RE THINKING OF OUR
FUTURE, OF THE FUTURE OF OUR
CHILDREN FOR THE KIND OF COUNTRY
WE WILL LIVE IN AND THE AIR WE
WILL BREATHE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY, A
MICHIGAN FARMER HAS DISCOVERED
THE REMAINS OF AN EXTINCT WOOLY
MAMMOTH.
WHAT HE THOUGHT WAS A FENCEPOST
BURIED IN HIS SOY FIELD TURNED
OUT TO BE THE THE BONES OF A
MAMMOTH THAT PROBABLY LIVED
10,000 YEARS AGO.
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
PALEONTOLOGISTS HAVE EXCAVATED
THE SKULLS, THE TUSKS AND MANY
OF THE RIBS AND VERTEBRAE OF THE
PREHISTORIC ELEPHANT.
THEY BELIEVE ANCIENT HUMANS
KILLED THE MAMMOTH FOR ITS MEAT.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.